---
title: Train In Blocks interviews... Mikey Lau
slug: TIB-interviews-Mikey Lau
exclusive: false
img: Mikey?
alt: Train In Blocks co-founder and coding guru Mikey Lau
author: Jamie Spoor
date: 2022-07-02T11:24:30.501Z
postDesc: We sat down to quiz our esteemed brainchild on all things fitness
---
Hot on the heels of our successful interview with[ personal training expert Sean Wilson](https://traininblocks.com/blog/sean-wilson-personal-trainer-interview/), we sat down with the man who made all this possible: our esteemed Train In Blocks co-founder and former PT Mikey Lau.
We sat down with Mikey over Zoom to discuss pretty much everything under the sun when it comes to fitness: to his experiences in the industry, the idea and inspiration behind TIB, the lasting legacy of the pandemic, the future and just about everything else in between. 
  


Experience in industry?

Started in a gym when I was younger because I wanted to get in shape and carried on in uni. I wasn’t in the best shape myself when I was younger and that inspired me to go into personal training because I saw first hand the effects of training and getting healthier had on your mental health and just generally makes you a more well rounded person.
I took that mindset to uni and experimented with a bunch of stuff as well, putting more focus on functional training, general day to day benefits rather than an aesthetic training style.
Second year I landed my first job in a “big box” gym helping the general population. I had amazing clients, very motivated and dedicated, a lot of them achieved great things like muscle mass or weight loss and they all showed incredible dedication to achieve great things. Then later on throughtout the years I started worked with the clinical population as well, so I had the chance of working in a referral clinic for people with stroke, Parkinson’s, Alzheimers, helping them with simply stuff we take for granted like walking, post-surgery recovery, building up strength again, which was very rewarding to see them progress and rebuild.
I then went on to spend more time with athletes, helping out a uni friend who was competing at a high level, so I’d help him with sports massage, therapy and recovery which was a qualification I was doing at the time. I helped him to take recovery more seriously.

How did you transition from that to TIB?

Through working in the industry I played around with periodisation and planning and admin for your clientele. You have different clients with different needs and what I witnessed with everyone was the need to adapt to different individuals, everyone’s different with different goals and different needs. I’ve worked in three different populations – general, clinical and sports so I’ve seen that. A typical method might be where you just put everything in a spreadsheet which will work to an extent but then let’s say you have someone who’s a bodybuilder and follows more the traditional method and another client who does CrossFit which incorporates elements like MetCon and doesn’t follow your sets and reps – you might 200 sit ups or something like that. I think of the “Murph” workout where you have a mild run at the start then into sit ups, pull ups, 200, 300 reps etc. It follows more of a pattern rather than 3 sets of 10 and then 3 minute rest in between or 20 sets for 5 reps. There’s many different ways to program, we’ve seen a recent shift in paradigm with training methods especially with the rise of CrossFit and functional training. It’s been around for ages but in recent times CrossFit is in the limelight and showing there’s an alternative method and people were jumping on that. We’ve also seen a change in how programs are written and our approach is more free form, which is what the most versatile way to program is. You basically write whatever program you want, you don’t have to put it into tables or anything it’s just easy to work with. Working with Excel sheets can be difficult to manage your time when you’re trying to adapt to different clients and methodology. Each client you might need to keep changing things, shifting things and it takes up too much time and time management in the industry is so important. The basic vision for Train In Blocks is to make programming easier and save you lots of time. One of the biggest things I wanted to implement in the web app is so the trainer can program the workout however they want, to write whatever you want. You can write a big wad of notes, or nothing at all. You can put protocols in, add more context, stuff you can do elsewhere but something like Excel is good to an extent but you want a more managed workflow. Workflow is our main ethos and core value as well so we want to bring that to light. If you are training multiple different clients then switching contexts and navigating through all your programs can be quite difficult. The idea was our users can write whatever they want, and in terms of tracking and analytics for exercises they just put things in square brackets so for example a back squat or 3 x 10 at 50kg. You put that in a square bracket and it tracks that. Then you have tracking in the free form style of programming so you get best of both worlds.

How can TIB help personal trainers?

It’s the workflow, definitely. We organize things in a comprehensive and easy to manage way. Go to the home screen, you’ll see your clients, go into your clients and you’ll see all the different plans associated with that client. There’s a notes section as well so if there’s something specific, for example a consultation, you go into their profile and then make notes on the client information as you go through the consultation. That gets saved as well and you can see a high level overview of everything on the home screen so that’s quite nice. There’s the option to give your clients access to the workout information so they can give you feedback or change it slightly if they want to. Inside the client profile you have the plans, they used to be called Blocks, hence the name Train In Blocks, but users got a bit confused so we call them plans now. The idea was centred around periodisation, so how you structure programs, workouts and how you increase the intensity and manage and manipulate the volume to achieve a stimulus.
Then you’ll hopefully have many of these periodisation plans for different phases. So say for example, an athlete might be going through conditioning and anatomical adaptation, then you might want hypertrophy cycle, building up muscle size, which increases glycogen. When you’re closer to competing or whatever event it is, you might want to switch in to maximum strength training phase to reach a one rep max to increase your overall strength. Then you need to consider de-loads and things like that. All of this requires complex planning so our idea is we want to compartmentalize everything into a single plan, which would essentially encapsulate everything associated with that phase of the process. So you might have one that’s strength training or maximum strength training and then add to the notes: “This is 12 weeks long” and then add any other details like the main exercises, the main tests you want to do, like a 1RM, a bench press or a back squat, or anything associated with recovery during that cycle. You add it all to the plan notes and the client can get access to them as well. Also any sessions within that plan will be inside that too. So it’s all organized and will follow a systemic workflow so again that’s our core value just like the workflow element.

How would you say Covid affected the industry?

Of course, Covid affected every industry especially the fitness one. I felt it a lot myself personally. I was still personal training throughout the pandemic, but moved online like everyone else. I was running classes as well. I did classes for companies around the local area I was working with, running it like a service for the residents locally, like accommodation, so I was doing classes for them. I ended up doing a lot of online coaching like most trainers and most other people. I think there has been quite a positive shift in fitness, I think people saw how important it was to stay fit especially when you couldn’t go to the gym or even just go out. I remember when lockdown first hit in our country and they were recommending us to only go out for shopping and like an hour walking but that was all.
Some trainers took to the park and some authorities weren’t happy with that but you had to do what you could do to help the industry survive during that time. Luckily they managed to put some protocols in place and reopen the gyms fairly early on but even the after effects, you could see how initially reluctant people were to go back to the gym and people still wanted to do online. There was a big shift in that and a lot more online personal, not training as such, but presets and templates which really helped people to get back into fitness. You can download these off the app store for free or like 79p and then jump on the workouts straight away but if you want something more focused and attentive then a personal trainer is the way to go. Personal trainers are still very relevant and were during Covid, but the general shift towards online coaching was quite a big move for the industry.

How can you become a better PT?

The biggest one for me was being open minded and to accept you’re going to have your views challenged. I think that’s a big one because there’s many, many ways to achieve something, particularly in fitness where there’s no set one way as long as you don’t do anything stupid like attempt an exercise which is clearly dangerous. All coaches and PTs would agree not to do that, but in terms of achieving goals there’s no right or wrong way to do it. For example, losing weight: you could do a lot of cardio if you want, or you can do circuits, MetCon, CrossFit so there’s many options. Staying open minded will allow you to utilize the best methods for your clients. If you only know one method and you stick to it because you really believe in it, then that’s fine but times do change and new things come out so you have to be open minded and adapt to the environment. You have to move with recent discoveries, the trends and look at anything new relating to fitness or new ways of doing something. It’s an ever developing field, it’s never finished. Like any industry, there’s always new things coming out and being open to all of that will help you in the long run.\
It’s not just training methods, it extends to all other aspects like communication and scheduling. I had clients who wanted the exact same goal but getting there we took a very, very different approach. So in terms of say for example weight gain or muscle gain, there’s so many ways in which to achieve that. One client might want a more body building style, like more sets and reps, but another client we tried that and the problem for him was adherence. Adherence is very important too. If you can’t get your clients to do what you want them to do, no one is getting anywhere so adherence is one of the biggest things to abide by. In my personal experience, the best way to get your clients to adhere to something is to get them to do something they really enjoy. If they don’t enjoy it, they’re not going to finish the program at all, so we actually went for a destructured MetCon. Not MetCon all the time but more functional training trends like CrossTrainer and CrossFit so we went for that rather than something more regular with splits and more sets of reps. We used WODs (Workout of the Day) and structuring quite extensive circuits with different exercises targeting multiple muscle groups and in certain durations and styles. So we might do like a descending stepladder, 20, 15, 10, 5 etc or sometimes a time base. That way, you can keep it interesting and varied, and that’s what the client really, really likes. It’s interesting, it’s different, it keeps you on your toes most sessions. It’s still thought out and there’s a target we were still aiming for, it was still at the forefront of all this programming. So there’s different ways to achieve different or sometimes the same things. Both got to their goals in the end in completely different ways

How about the future both for the industry and for TIB?

In terms of the industry, it’s going really strong as always. New things are always coming out: different methodologies, new research. I read up on recent trends and Lululemon acquired like a smart mirror company and now there’s personal trainers in digital mirrors or something so there’s always new tools, equipment, gadgets and innovations coming out. I used to do weightlifting and nowadays I’m just boxing so in that trend I think a lot of people are taking up fitness which is really good, and people are prioritizing fitness in ways they really enjoy so that they adhere to that. In terms of the gyms, everything’s affordable now, gym memberships are reasonably priced, at least in the bigger cities. So I think fitness is going in a generally really good direction especially with more people partaking in it.
In terms of Train In Blocks, the future holds for us we want to implement many many new methods so our users can optimize their workflow and reduce the time they spend on the app. If they spend less time on the app itself it means they program faster and manage the client faster, that way they can be out the gym floor helping their clients more. So our ethos would be spend less time on the app, be ‘out there’, train your clients.

What have you learned from running TIB?

So of course running a business was part of being a personal trainer because you are self employed. I would say Train In Blocks is my first company, because I was a sole trader as a PT. I gathered some experience from my personal training and then brought it across into TIB. Everything was quite new to me when I was starting the business, meeting Joe and basically designing and programming with Joe and everything so that was a lot of learning initially. The learning curve was quite steep as well as it was only just the two of us boot-strapping this company financially as well. We had support from the university who granted us some money which was great because we did a Dragon’s Den style pitch which was quite fun to do!
It was a lot of learning and I’m very appreciative of all the experience I had and continue to have in running this business. Even to this day I’m still learning, I think it’s always good to again stay open minded and accept new situations, to adapt and learn from them. You can always refer to them in the future. It’s such a clichéd thing but I think it’s true: you never stop learning.
I’ve been loving it, it keeps you on your toes and it’s been wonderful to see how our users have benefited from the app as well. We’ve had some reviews and some comments about how simple it is to use, and how affordable it is compared to our competitors. That’s another key thing about us: we have quite a lot of overheads so that way we can bring the affordability to personal trainers who are maybe starting out and maybe struggling to find a way to manage the clientele. It’s such a competitive industry you really have to put yourself out there so again it goes back to what I was saying about spending less time on the app. In turn, people then see you “out there” with the clients and get to know your name, get to know you a bit more and be familiar. Then you can pick up more clients and extend your influence. Our ethos is affordable, accessible and functional. We have made the UI (user interface) as simple as we can, aimed at reducing a lot of clutter so you know where you want to go from there. What you see is what you get. There’s no faffing about trying to figure things out.
The marketing side of it has been interesting to learn; you have to do that to an extent to market yourself as a personal trainer to sell to people why they should pick you. You have to be the whole package but that’s why it’s such a good learning experience. Even if you’re not a PT for the rest of your life, the skills you get from it are invaluable.”